Install Docker on Ubuntu Server

First, I updated the system. on ubuntu I ran the script 
sudo apt update
sudo apt upgrade -y

Then i installed Docker 
sudo apt install docker.io -y
And then these scripts enable and start docker 
sudo systemctl enable docker
sudo systemctl start docker

Then i verified the install room version because the the way you enter scripts depends on the version you have. I put in 
sudo docker --version
once that's checked in I run 
sudo apt install docker-compose -y
then verify the version 
docker-compose --version
All these commands helped me install docker on ubuntu server. 

Next i create a monitoring stack directory with this command 
mkdir monitoring-stack
cd monitoring-stack
Inside this directory, I created the required configuration files: 
nano docker-compose.yml
nano prometheus.yml
For Grafana, configuration was handled inside the Docker Compose file.

In this next step i had to Edit YAML files directly inside Ubuntu using nano but i found it difficult due to specific formatting spacing and copy/paste limitations within the CLI environment of ubuntu server. So i decided to use SSH from my windows laptop to remotely control the ubuntu server. But to be able to do this i had to find out what ubuntus ip address was. although i didn't understand to well but i would realize that the ip address can change sometime. on my windows laptop i went to powershell and i ran the command ip a or hostname -I
that's going to give you the internal LAN IP
  (example: 192.168.1.50). With that ip you will write ssh "username@192.168.1.50" then it will ask for the password of that ubuntu server and then i got in.

SSH allowed me to:
-Cleanly copy and paste full YAML configurations
-Avoid indentation errors
-Manage files more efficiently

in my windows laptop i then opened my monitoring stack directory and reopened nano docker and prometheus 
AI gave me the exact YAML configurations 

Example docker-compose.yml Structure
version: '3'

services:
  prometheus:
    image: prom/prometheus
    container_name: prometheus
    volumes:
      - ./prometheus.yml:/etc/prometheus/prometheus.yml
    ports:
      - "9090:9090"

  grafana:
    image: grafana/grafana
    container_name: grafana
    ports:
      - "3000:3000"

And Prometheus 
global:
  scrape_interval: 15s

scrape_configs:
  - job_name: 'prometheus'
    static_configs:
      - targets: ['localhost:9090']

From here after the configurations were written out i the launched the monitoring stack with 
sudo docker-compose up -d
and then i verified the containers were running 
sudo docker ps
If successful, it will say Prometheus running on port 9090 and Grafana running on port 3000.

Now i had set up the backend. from here I had planned to use my laptop to basically view everything that is happening to the ubuntu server. On my laptop web browser I ran these on two separate browsers 
http://192.168.1.50:9090
http://192.168.1.50:3000
 this is prometheus and grafana. My plan was to connect these together. Prometheus Confirms metrics and validates whether services are being monitored.

so Prometheus collects data and grafana visializes. in grafana i go to settings-data sources-add data source and i selected prometheus. then i entered the url http://prometheus:9090. That will work only if both of the containers are in the same network.

Lastly i click save and test. Now it should be connected and i would be able to monitor ubuntu machine. From everything that I did when i accessed grafana i did it from my laptop which is over my internal LAN going through my switch and my firewall. I understood that it was only reachable inside my homelab network. And that's the safest setup for a lab .From here i was able to monitor ubuntu from my homelab and practiced what it would look like when being under attack with using Kali linux.